# Internet Freedom

```
freedom
    /ˈfriːdəm/
    noun
        1.
        the power or right to act, speak, or think as one wants.

        2.
        the state of not being imprisoned or enslaved.
```

## Concerning internet freedom and privacy

Freedom is an important part of the daily life of a person. A human is allowed to do anything the society approves and has the freedom to do it. But this applies in internet too. As people now communicate through internet and it has become a big part of our lives, we should raise our concerns towards internet freedom and privacy. Because like a real life society, the internet itself is now a society of people.

From the definition of freedom, we know it is the state of not being imprisoned or enslaved. In the internet, our information is valuable because people can make money out of mere common information that does not show any value in real life. For example, preference over shopping items, interests in sports etc. All these are personal information of a person but anyone may know them if the said person wishes to express. So corporations collecting our info that we give out should not be a problem, right?

Here's the catch bro, have you asked yourself if you wanted to share the information to corporations so they make money? You are not getting a profit out of this, are you? So, corporations take common information that is valuable to them, from you without your permission and then make money out of it by selling that information to analytics and people that uses mass information to create "dark patterns".

## What is online fingerprinting?

Online fingerprinting is identification of an user in different websites through information leaked/provided by the target user. For example, if you search sports materials and favorite football teams in Google, the next thing you'll see is attractive football advertisements in different websites. At one point, you may actually click one of those advertisements. Sometimes websites put trackers on your browser and sees what other websites you visit and what else you do. Which at this point is serious privacy violation but the company can always make the excuse, "it's the user that's giving out this info bleh". They will use online fingerprinting to make dark patterns that attract users attention and make money out of it.

## What are dark patterns?

See this video,

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/kxkrdLI6e6M" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

This 7 minutes video explains about dark patterns and how they trick you. The simplest example I can think of right now is during Windows Installation, when Microsoft's telemetry (information collection and analytics) ask you for permissions to turn on "features" that ultimately violates your privacy by sending valuable information and data to Microsoft, if you deny that, it will give out different buttons like, "I'll choose offline mode with no features then, " etc. I can't remember it exactly but reading it will make you feel like you are missing out good things but it is all deceit.

Dark patterns are widely used by other services. Amazon being the biggest bitch here, I cannot disable my amazon account no matter what. Even it was tedious to contact them because they would say to contact this other person and then that other person to the point I had to leave. No one wants any of this bullshittery in their lives.

This is why be aware of dark patterns generated by services that uses your online fingerprints.

## How do I get away from all of these?

Let us use the basic rule that we all follow against bad things, *prevention and precaution*.

Here is how they work,

```
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Collect data -> Make an online fingerprint -> Create dark patterns on websites |
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

Out of all of them, which one we can prevent? Of course the first one, do not let them collect the data. How? we stop providing data at all! You do not have any need to show what you like, what you eat, what you wear etc. In real life, when you go outside, do you wear an ID card on your neck that says about what your favorite sports teams are? Do people come to you, pull your ID card and read it?

This is the same as letting everyone that knows you in the internet be a real life stalker. In real life, you would not want a random person to know what drinks you like. So, you do not provide information about yourself in the public other than the basic identification such as name, picture etc. Unless your internet life is not affiliated with your real life one, you can skip both of them and stay anonymous. Disconnect both completely and you will have internet freedom to do anything you want (of course you shouldn't do anything you want, that's actually bad).

Other than that, there are other tips to maintaining privacy against these data collectors. Such as using tracker blockers and extensions on secure and private browsers, avoiding ads and patterns in websites, not exposing real life identity in the internet etc. Anyone can easily ruin internet fingerprinting by distorting the information now and then, by using VPNs and private windows, they will not be able to detect a common pattern of a target user and so they cannot produce a fingerprint that websites can use to make dark patterns.

Using [free software](https://www.fsf.org/about/what-is-free-software), you can protect your freedom because the softwares will not be made with malicious intents and cannot take away user's freedom to do whatever they want with the software. This is the greatest way to secure internet freedom, practically using everything that is of free software. This can easily cripple corporations that collect information of people without their permissions for money.

Most information related to data collections and tracking are given in Terms of Use and Privacy Policy of websites and softwares which you have to agree on and it is mandatory if you want to use the service. So websites that provide you "free" or whatever service always adds the cost of your valuable information as payment *legally* through ToS and privacy policy. So be aware of these!

## Conclusion

In order to build a safer and sanitized internet, we all should be aware from malicious intents of big corporations that uses our freedom for their profits. We must prevent an internet dystopia of users controlled by softwares.

All hail internet freedom! :D
